One of the most underrated qualities
in today’s world is modesty.
In fact, the world encourages
the exact opposite of modesty.
The world says that you are
the most important person;
you should promote yourself;
you have no limits;
you have the right to be anything you want to be.
As we’ll see, the world’s thinking
is completely backward
—and for several reasons.
Really, modesty is a quality
that stems from everything that is good.
Our theme scripture
for this discussion is Micah 6:8:
“He has told you . . . what is good.
“And what is Jehovah requiring of you?
“Only to exercise justice, to cherish loyalty,
and to walk in modesty with your God!”
Notice that modesty is one
of the key aspects of “what is good.”
To help us understand why,
let’s discuss three questions:
What is modesty?
Why do we want to have this quality?
How can we cultivate it?
First, what is modesty?
Basically, it’s an awareness of our limitations.
Of course, we often link modesty
with appropriate dress and grooming,
but much more is involved.
How do we know?
Consider what we read at Proverbs 11:2:
“When presumptuousness comes,
“dishonor will follow,
but wisdom is with the modest ones.”
Notice that modesty is contrasted
with a negative quality—presumptuousness.
A presumptuous person
runs ahead without the authority to do so.
He or she ignores
proper boundaries and limitations.
That kind of attitude
often leads to foolish mistakes
and a bad reputation with fellow humans.
And above all,
it can cause a person to lose God’s favor.
For example, we might think of King Saul.
Although he started out as a modest young man,
in time he became presumptuous.
He even went so far as to offer up
a burnt sacrifice
even though he was not authorized to do so.
As a result,
Saul lost Jehovah’s favor
and eventually the kingship.
In Saul’s case, presumptuousness definitely
led to dishonor.
On the other hand,
a wise and modest person
recognizes his limitations and works within them.
Why is modesty the course of wisdom?
This brings us to our second main point,
Why do we want to have this quality?
The foremost reason
is that modesty is essential
to pleasing our heavenly Father, Jehovah.
Although we don’t speak
of Jehovah as being modest,
even he works within certain limitations
that he’s imposed on himself.
He teaches us by example
how to demonstrate this quality,
even though it’s not one that he needs to display.
Why can we say that Jehovah
imposes limitations on himself?
Consider just one example:
He’ll never violate
the gift of free will that he’s granted us.
Jehovah will never force us to serve him
—even though, of course,
he has the power to do so.
Aren’t we grateful that he allows us to serve him
because we choose to out of love
and not because we are forced to?
Jehovah teaches us
to display modesty in other ways as well.
For example, we might think
of how he listened patiently
as Abraham voiced his concerns
about Jehovah’s purpose
to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah
or how Jehovah invited
the angels to suggest ways to fool Ahab
and then authorized
one of their suggestions to be carried out.
What’s the lesson for us?
If Jehovah, who doesn’t need
input or help from anyone,
patiently listens and delegates,
how much more should we do so
—especially since
we’re all so imperfect and limited!
Are you a family head
or an elder in the congregation,
or do you have
another responsible position in the organization?
If so, you can imitate Jehovah
by not micromanaging others.
Be willing to delegate tasks to them
and listen to their suggestions.
Imitate Jehovah’s example of dignifying others
and wanting to help them succeed.
Besides pleasing Jehovah,
we have other good reasons to be modest.
Modesty helps us to be joyful.
How so?
By going hand in hand
with a related quality—gratitude.
A faithful brother who worked
in the Writing Department
for some 50 years was fond of saying,
“Only a grateful person can be happy.”
If we’re modestly aware of our limitations,
we’ll be grateful and happy
for the help that we receive from others.
For example,
think of the leper who returned
to thank Jesus for healing him.
This man realized his limitations.
He was very thankful that Jesus
had done something for him
that he could never have done on his own.
Another reason to cultivate modesty
is that it promotes good relationships with others.
Let’s face it:
People aren’t usually drawn to those who think,
‘If I want something done right,
I have to do it myself.’
But they usually appreciate it when they’re shown
that we have confidence in them.
This, in turn, draws them to us.
Another way that modesty
promotes good relationships
is that it helps us
to avoid comparing ourselves to others.
Comparing ourselves to others
is always a dangerous road to navigate.
Just think, for example, of Jesus’ apostles
who argued many times over
who was the greatest
or of Joseph’s brothers
and the terrible things they did
because of being jealous of Joseph.
A modest person doesn’t obsess
over his perceived rank in comparison with others.
In this regard,
we can remember the good example of Moses.
How did he react when Jehovah
enabled some of his fellow Israelites
to begin acting as prophets alongside him?
Moses rejoiced,
saying that he wished all
of Jehovah’s people were prophets.
Moses didn’t feel that he was
the only one who should have such a privilege.
Finally, modesty promotes
good relationships with others
because it prevents us
from bragging about our accomplishments
or drawing undue attention to ourselves,
which could stir up resentment in others.
So now we know what modesty is
and why we want to have it.
This brings us to our third main point,
How can we cultivate this beautiful quality?
One thing we can do
is to read and meditate on Bible examples
—both good and bad—
such as those we just discussed.
Other Bible examples include Daniel,
who modestly didn’t take credit
for the interpretation
of King Nebuchadnezzar’s dream.
The lesson for us?
If we’re privileged to have a teaching assignment
or we enjoy a measure of success in the ministry,
we want to give all the glory to Jehovah.
We should modestly recognize
that we couldn’t do these things without his help.
We can also study the example of Jesus,
who didn’t even think of trying to grasp
for more authority than Jehovah had granted him.
Philippians 2:6 tells us:
“He . . . gave no consideration to a seizure,
namely, that he should be equal to God.”
Consider how Jesus responded
when his disciples James
and John approached him
with their mother
and asked for a privilege
that was beyond his authority to grant them.
Jesus modestly acknowledged
that only Jehovah could decide
who would sit at his right
and left hand in the Kingdom.
Jesus respected his limitations.
What are some other ways
we can cultivate modesty?
One is to apply the Bible’s counsel
found at 1 Corinthians 4:6:
“Do not go beyond the things that are written.”
This refers primarily
to ‘the things written’ in God’s Word.
By extension, the principle
also applies to the Scriptural direction
that we receive from our publications.
When asked for advice,
we would never want to impose our own opinion
or simply give an answer off the top of our head.
Rather, we want to direct attention
to the counsel found in the Bible
and Bible-based publications.
Another way we can cultivate modesty
is by asking for frank comments
from a trusted friend
as to whether or not
we have a reputation for being modest.
In this regard, we remember the Bible principle:
“As iron sharpens iron,
so one man sharpens his friend.”
If someone is willing to offer
kind observations about how we can improve,
we wouldn’t want to bristle at the comments.
Granted, it may sting our pride
to hear such honest feedback,
but don’t we all need
to hear these things from time to time?
As imperfect humans,
each one of us has blind spots, as it were.
It’s hard to see ourselves the way others see us.
Remember, we can work
to improve our Christian personality
—but only if we know
the areas that could use some improvement.
We can’t change what we don’t see.
A word of caution:
We want to beware of false modesty.
Remember that it’s not
about simply appearing modest
but actually being modest at heart.
To help us examine ourselves,
we might meditate on questions like these:
When I receive advice or counsel,
how do I really feel about it at heart?
Does my internal reaction
depend on whether the person giving it
has less or more experience
or authority than I do?
Am I willing to accept valid suggestions
regardless of who offers them?
A final way we can develop true modesty
is to ask Jehovah to help us.
We know what James 1:17 says:
“Every good gift and every perfect present is from above,
coming down from the Father of the celestial lights.”
Since modesty is one of Jehovah’s good gifts to us,
we can be sure that if we pray to Jehovah and ask him
to help us cultivate this quality,
he’ll answer our sincere prayers.
In review, what is modesty?
It’s a proper recognition of our limitations.
Why do we want to have this quality?
Because it pleases Jehovah,
it promotes good relationships with others,
and it adds to our joy.
How can we cultivate modesty?
There are many ways:
We can meditate on Bible examples,
both good and bad,
and then apply the lessons in our own life.
We should apply the counsel
to ‘not go beyond the things written.’
We can ask others for honest feedback
on how we’re doing in showing this quality.
And above all, we can pray to Jehovah
and ask him to help us develop it more fully.
When we think of all the positive ways
that modesty benefits ourselves and others,
wouldn’t you agree that it truly is a quality
that comes from “what is good”?